so if you're feeling jealous towards
other people if you find yourself sort
of having this mental frankenstein then
i'd highly highly recommend that you
sort of really think about where
thoughts come from
where your own unhappiness comes from
understanding the relationship between
your unhappiness ego and comparison and
then start to learn how to cultivate
thoughts in the right direction so we're
going to talk i'm going to move to a
different prompt for a second but you
know basically like
i want you all to really think long and
hard about like what is the influence of
different things on the thoughts in your
head
okay
so what we're going to talk about now is
like where do thoughts come from so i
know it sounds like kind of a weird
question but i'd love to talk to you
guys because i think it's really
important to understand like where the
thoughts in your head come from if
you're a doomer if you think that the
world is going to hell if you think
you're going to be alone for the rest of
your life where do those thoughts come
from and how can you start to go about
controlling your mind so let's take a
quick look at a case
i am more than my sex life i compare
myself to my friends all the time over
everything imaginable relationship
status social media presence physique
mental health career goals sense of
humor etc the list goes
as specific as you can imagine i compare
my friends sex lives to my own
non-existent one this is the most
embarrassing comparison i make
yet the one that affects me the most as
a result i'm extremely jealous of my
friends on basically every level
everything i want my friends seem to
have so naturally or they have more of
it it's leading me down a spiral where i
hate myself the more i hang out with my
friends then that jealousy makes me feel
like a shitty friend because i want so
desperately to be a good friend and be
supportive of my friends without having
it affect my self-confidence or
self-perception but feeling crappy
doesn't stop my jealousy so i keep
feeling more jealous and then crappier
it's a terrible thought loop and i've
been struggling for with a year now
anyway i'm making this post to remind
myself that i'm more than my virginity
i'm terrified of relationships even
though i want to be in once so
desperately so i'm extremely jealous of
people who don't struggle with
self-loathing to the point where they
panic at just the idea of falling in
love with someone and having them fall
in love with you back i have to believe
that i'm more than my virginity even
though it feels like my non-existent
sex life is indicative of so much more
of being unlovable because i'm not
giving up
i have to remind myself that my
virginity doesn't define me unless i let
it it's really hard to but i have to
it's really hard to feel like i'm living
in my friend's shadows when i hang out
with them but i have to i'm thankful i
found this community and i have this
outlet
so this is a fantastic post so let's the
first thing that i want to point out to
y'all is do you guys notice the war
that goes on in the mind so the mind
sometimes produces
particular thoughts and sometimes we
fight against those thoughts and there's
a lot of exploration of this in in dr
k's guide and this is something that i
think would be really good because there
are a lot of points in dr k's guide that
i would encourage this person to check
out one is the mental frankenstein so
when our mind makes comparisons
what it always does is since those
comparisons tend to be fueled by
insecurities what our mind constructs is
a mental frankenstein
anytime i make a comparison i make a
comparison that proves my own insecurity
so i don't compare 10 dimensions against
one person what i do is i compare
10 people and i look at the best things
that each of those people do and i i
pick the best things for from 10 people
and i compare them to myself so this
person says i compare myself to my
friends in all aspects careers sex life
how they look how social they are and so
if your mind wants to if you have that
feeling
feeling of insecurity what you'll do is
create this mental frankenstein of how
you were inferior all the time to
everyone and it's a very unfair
comparison
so then the question becomes okay so
like if you're having these kinds of
thoughts this person is trying to say
okay i'm more than my virginity etc so
what do you do in this situation what do
you do if you make lots of comparisons
and you feel really jealous of the
people that you care about right so
there are two things that you can do one
is you can get to the root of the
insecurity so there's a very important
yogic principle
that sort of shows where insecurities
come from and why we compare when we
have insecurities so we'll get to that
in a second
the second thing that we can do is
cultivate the right kinds of thoughts so
what is this yogic principle i'm talking
about
so anytime that your mind feels negative
emotion or feels insecure
there's a part of your mind called the
ahamkar which activates
and the aham god is your ego and is sort
of like the bouncer of your mind so
anytime you feel insecure the ahm god
will activate and will do one of two
things it'll either pump yourself up or
put other people down or it'll make
comparisons so if we kind of think about
it all kind of comparison is coming from
the ego so it's sort of like you know
anytime i compare myself to someone else
to make that comparison i have to have
an idea of myself and what i am all
comparison is driven by ego so like if i
look at someone else and i genuinely
appreciate them and i don't think about
myself i'm like oh look at how happy my
friend is he got a you know he found a
new partner it sounds like he's like
crushing it and he's like really in love
like that's fantastic
notice that that appreciation
has to in order for that appreciation to
exist there can't be any ego involved
the second that my mind produces oh let
me compare that to myself because all
comparisons are going to have like at
least ego comparisons are going to be
comparisons to yourself
so that's going to involve ego ego steps
and then i start thinking about who i am
in my identity because you can't make
that comparison unless you have a
particular identity
so what should you do about that so that
insecurity or that ego is gonna come
back to some kind of emotional
experience or emotion that you're
feeling and as you work on the source of
that emotion what's gonna happen is the
ego will actually calm down and then
you'll be able to appreciate what your
friends have because then like you know
you have no insecurity that that goes
that underlies that ego fuel
so then the question becomes okay how do
i work on my internal emotions so this
is something that you can you know if
you have clinical concerns or things
like that this is something that
absolutely um you know therapists can
help you do this is something that we
train our coaches to do which is sort of
like help you understand your emotions
and where those kinds of like emotions
come from and it turns out that as you
start to like recognize the underlying
emotion like the jealousy and the ego
above it will start to fall apart
because the only way that you can be
jealous of someone is if you yourself
don't have something so this is the
question that i would ask this person if
you were in a healthy loving
relationship that was like positively
sexual would you still feel jealous of
your friends and the answer is almost
certainly overwhelmingly no right and so
if we really think about that then
what is the what is the key to disarming
jealousy it has nothing to do with them
they haven't changed at all their
situation is actually exactly the same
what needs to change is you what needs
to change is your perception of yourself
because the other interesting thing is
that you don't have to have a
relationship that is loving in order to
stop feeling jealous towards other
people that's what we think so we always
think that sort of fixing something on
the in the external world will be the
solution to our internal problems but
what you really need to do is work on
that sense of being unlovable work on
that sense of being ashamed work on that
sense that you'll be alone forever right
so this person even says
i'm terrified of relationships even
though i want to be one
so desperately i'm extremely jealous of
people who don't struggle with
self-loathing to the point where they
panic and this is what you need to fix
right why are you terrified of
relationships why do you struggle with
self-loathing like you know like why do
you panic at the idea of falling in love
as long as these things are there
that jealousy will continue to exist
right so then the question becomes when
did you start to feel
like like when did you start to become
terrified of relationships how did your
brain learn
to fear relationships and as you do that
kind of work as you ask those kinds of
questions as you work through those
issues then the jealousy will actually
collapse it'll like just kind of fizzle
apart right as your own insecurities
start to get metabolized as you start to
build confidence the jealousy will
actually kind of just it'll fall apart
because it has no basis because the
jealousy is based on an idea of what you
don't have and that idea of what you
don't have is based on your fear your
shame your sense of unlovableness so the
second thing that you can do is be
careful about the way that you cultivate
thoughts
so when we talk about cultivating
thoughts what i mean is that if you
really think about it and there's a lot
of information about this in the the
guides by the way
so if you think about where does a
thought come from right so we were just
talking a little bit about you know how
the world is going to hell
where does the idea that the world is
going to hell come from it comes from
external sources right it comes from the
indriyas and when i get exposed to
things through my sense organs either
through sight or sound that exposure
will create particular thoughts so i
don't know if you guys is going to sound
like kind of a weird question but how
many people do you thought
how many people do you think we're
looking forward to wow classic in 1979
not a single one right no one was
looking forward to wow classic in 1979.
why is that why did no one look why did
no one think about wow classic in 1979
because their indriyas had never gotten
sense exposure to it right when did
people start to look forward to wow
classic when their sense organs
encountered something if you think about
people who are addicted to video games
why are they addicted to video games
it's because their mind dwells in those
thoughts all the time when i play a game
i'm thinking about it right so the more
time that my mind spends thinking about
a game the more hours it spends thinking
about a game then when i turn the game
off i've cultivated i've spent a lot of
time growing those kinds of thoughts so
even when i'm not playing the game i'm
thinking about the game and this makes a
lot of sense if you look at games that
actually aren't fun to play
if you talk to people who are addicted
to video games
what they'll say is that i don't even
enjoy playing the game anymore like you
talk to law players or dota players or
like whatever and they'll say like
it's frustrating to play it's not
actually fun but i can't stop and even
when they're not playing the game they
like start thinking about the game when
they go to bed they think about their
game they're like oh my god that game
was so crappy i hated it that person fed
so much and so what it turns out is that
your the thoughts in your head can
actually be cultivated right so the more
sensory exposure that you get to a
particular thing the more you will
cultivate that thing we also see this in
cases of trauma right so if someone
grows up in an emotionally abusive
household where they're told that
they're like a crappy person and that
they're not worth anything
that sensory exposure will start to
create thought-generating machines in
the mind and that's what they'll think
to themselves all the time thoughts
begin from kind of the outside world
right they come in through our sensory
organs so you have to be very careful
about what kinds of thoughts you
cultivate the second thing is that once
a thought enters your mind you can
choose to engage with it or you can
choose not to engage with it and we see
evidence of that here too i compare
myself to my friends all the time over
everything imaginable so as long as you
are giving in to that desire to compare
as long as you are letting thought
number one compare to thought
chain into thought number two and grow
thought number three what i want you
guys to to realize is that this person
has a gigantic fruit-bearing tree and
the fruits that it actually grows are
comparative thoughts and we see that it
compares to all kinds of stuff right
because at this point
this person is compared so much has
cultivated all of these thoughts of
comparison that the second they start to
make one comparison their mind they'll
give into it and their mind will make a
second comparison third comparison
fourth comparison fifth comparison and
then when they go see their friend and
their friend is like you know there with
their new
like girlfriend or boyfriend
that sensory trigger will activate this
complex within the mind that has been
heavily heavily cultivated fertilized
watered and then the comparison train
will begin
so then the question becomes how do i
stop cultivating a particular thought
so what you need to do is notice
that when your mind starts to make
comparisons that you can indulge in that
thought or you cannot indulge in that
thought you can start to change the way
that you think and we see that this
person is doing that too right so as i
make anyway i'm making this post to
remind myself that i am more than my
virginity right so what this person is
doing is like the thought comes comes up
in their mind that i am based on my sex
my value as a human being is based on my
sexual experience and there's another
possibility that you can sort of start
to cultivate thoughts that actually you
know my value as a human being doesn't
necessarily have to relate to my
virginity
there are actually things that you can
do that will cultivate thoughts in a
different direction
so one recommendation that i'd have for
people who experience a lot of jealousy
is ask yourself if you were in a happy
place
would you still feel ill will towards
the other person
and then if the answer to that question
is probably no you wouldn't feel ill
well like so if you feel jealous of
someone else's relationship ask yourself
if i am if i was happier in my
relationship would i be jealous then the
answer is no and then what you ask
yourself is okay so what am i unhappy
about in my relationship and as you do
that what you're going to be kind of
doing two things one is you're going to
be
stopping the process of cultivating
comparative thoughts you're going to be
sort of reigning in the jealousy because
if you don't ask yourself that question
you're going to think about how jealous
you are you're going to think about how
good they have it and for the next 30
minutes you're going to be fertilizing
your comparison tree
so instead ask yourself what am i
unhappy about and then as you go through
that introspection not only are you
stopping the cultivation of comparison
you were also introspecting about your
own unhappiness
and as you sort of start to ask those
questions and hopefully do it in sort of
a productive way where you start to try
to remain a little bit objective try to
accept yourself for who you are
hopefully you'll get to the root of the
your unhappiness and you'll start to
metabolize that as well
so if you're feeling jealous towards
other people if you find yourself sort
of having this mental frankenstein then
i'd highly highly recommend that you
sort of really think about where
thoughts come from where your own
unhappiness comes from understanding the
relationship between your unhappiness
ego and comparison and then start to
learn how to cultivate thoughts in the
right direction there are a lot of
different things in dr k's guide that
relate to this concept and this is sort
of like why it's hard because there's
not going to be one video about this but
there's actually half a dozen videos so
i'd recommend looking at the video on
sangha or community that's a video that
explains where thoughts come from
there's another video about you know the
mental frankenstein i think it's falling
behind and the depression uh
the depression guide but this concept of
like how do we make comparisons there's
a lot of stuff in the meditation guide
about the nature of confidence versus
ego and where ego comes from and what is
ego there's a long lecture like almost
an hour-long lecture on vedic psychology
that explains the relationship between
your emotions and your ego and your
intellect and how we make different
kinds of comparisons so there's a lot of
good stuff in there there's not a
specific video about this but i think as
you understand all of those different
concepts hopefully you'll be able to
like really get a good handle on sort of
what we talked about today
very shelley's for aging in her grave no
i think mary shelley shouldn't be raging
i think that she's done a very good job
i guess frankenstein's monster
maybe that's why she's raging in her
grave but
um i i think she did a wonderful job of
giving us a concept that we can then use
because frankenstein isn't isn't the
thing that was stitched together right
it was the doctor fair enough